Cardiff Carnival Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Tracy Harding.
The venue is the Swicker office
and the date today is Friday the 21st of November 2014.
Tracy, for the record, could you please spell your name?
I'll give that a go.
T-R-A-C-E-Y
and surname H-A-R-D-I-N-G.
Thanks for that. And you got it right, you'd be glad to know.
Yeah. Excellent.
What's your first recollection of the Cardiff Mass Carnival
as it was then?
I first recall the carnival
with young people wearing sailor costumes,
but I can't particularly,
I think it was in Queen Street and Cardiff Castle,
but I can't specifically remember that,
but I was working for what was Cardiff City Council then
and would have been working at the Children's Festival,
which I believe they took part in.
Absolutely. That would be the very, very first one in 1990
and it was led by an artist from Trinidad called Katherine Chan,
who thought it would be a good idea
to introduce Wales and Cardiff to carnival
by recreating our own version
of a traditional Trinidadian masquerade,
which was based on sailors.
So it was a sailor bar, so you quite like it.
I can remember those costumes distinctly.
What was quite interesting for me is that,
in fact, we didn't go, the route wasn't Queen Street,
but in fact, it was St. Mary's Street.
At that point, St. Mary's Street wasn't pedestrianized
and also had a divider down the middle
and we'd managed to close one side of the road.
So we're parading up one side of the road,
whilst the other side of the road actually had cars in it.
And I just remember thinking, very dangerous.
No, it didn't.
I mean, it meant that half our potential audience
in that area couldn't see what we were doing
because there were cars passing in front of them.
But there we are.
Early days, we sort of evolved and developed from there.
So having seen it in its original formation
when it wasn't intergenerational just for kids,
you then, of course, took the carnival plunge
and became a participant, am I right?
I did.
And I think, actually, it was through that children's event
and I worked with children
at Time in the Play Service in Cardiff.
I became involved by making gigantes,
which are huge, huge puppets.
I think they were about 20 foot tall.
And I remember one of them was a fish
and I think the other one was a lion.
And we made them with the children of withies
that we soaked and then used this very thick cling film
that had to go and buy specially
and sort of thick tissue paper as well that we covered.
So it created quite a strong structure.
And then we painted the whole thing.
And paraded through Cardiff.
I think we ended up on the museum steps
and the children carried these huge, huge puppets
together with myself and another play worker called Wes
who came from the Riverside Play Center at the time.
And I think it was the Riverside Play Center
that we worked with particularly
and possibly Grangetown as well.
Was Wes also known as West Ham?
He was, that was West Ham, yeah.
That was West Ham, I mean,
the man with the loudest voice in Cardiff.
He only had one tone of voice.
Even if he was whispering a secret or,
he could only bellow,
which was rather fascinating to me.
Even when a bellow wasn't required, it was very loud.
No, I remember him well and affectionately.
Yeah, so Westy and I took the kids through Cardiff
and there were these huge, huge puppets.
And nobody died.
No, thankfully.
Not carrying those.
They were quite weighty things.
Can't really remember what happened to them afterwards,
but they were quite spectacular at the time.
I'm sure everybody applauded.
Yeah.
I've got good memories that I associate with them.
Yeah, yeah.
What happened next in your carnival journey?
Well, I think,
I think I then became a terrorist banker from hell
and worked with Warped and Twisted with Tom and Ali
and Marega Pulsar, I remember particularly.
And we created these costumes
that were like big black clown trousers
and they had a wire right through the waist
so they stood out from your body
and they have braces to keep them on you.
And we had white vests and black bowler hats
with white horns curling out of the bowler hats.
I think our faces were painted
like skeletons or something like that.
And we were wearing roller skates
and we made the costumes in Kutais Community Centre.
And then we had to roller skate
from Kutais Community Centre around the corner
and over the bridge to head into Cardiff City Centre.
And I can remember coming to the bridge
and thinking, goodness, how am I gonna skate
down the other side of this bridge
without crashing into somebody in front of me?
So I then quickly realised that actually the way to do it
was to skate from side to side
rather than just to go straight down
and plough through the rest of the carnival.
So that's what I did.
I managed to get to the sort of bottom of that bridge safely.
And then the idea really was to sort of skate around
and kind of skate up to the crowd
and almost kind of like terrorise them
as a terrorist banker.
And kind of just skate around doing that really.
It was great fun.
Thoroughly enjoyed it.
And yeah, I loved roller skating.
So it was brilliant for me
and I was quite a good roller skater.
So you could do turns and everything.
So yeah, it was good fun actually that one.
I enjoyed that.
It sounds wonderful.
And of course, this is all social comments about,
well, some of the downsides of banking
well before they introduced these austere times to us.
So I think you probably foresaw that in some way, didn't you?
I mean, obviously, you know, predictions
of capitalism gone wrong.
Yeah, definitely, definitely.
I think there was an alternative name for those as well,
which I can't really say for the record
because it's a bit rude.
I'm not sure we can work it out.
Is it rhyming slang?
It was.
Yes, I can imagine.
It began with the letter W if you're listening to the future.
You can work that out for yourselves.
Yes.
But yes, it was very much about all that.
So having skated in 1995,
you took your skates off and became a carnival dancer.
Am I right?
I did, yes.
And became a leaf, I think.
So from a terrace banker to a leaf is quite extreme.
But yeah, wore a big green pointed leafy hat
and danced with some of the other professional dancers
in Cardiff, because that's what I did at the time.
I was a dancer, danced professionally and taught dance.
And I danced with June Campbell, Janet Fieldsend,
Mareaga, Polzar, Miranda, Fernandez,
Sally McLennan, Sally Verrell.
There were a few of us that were sort of in a group
and we all sort of danced together
and choreographed this particular dance
that we then as part of the carnival,
danced and paraded through.
Would you have been parading to the music
of one of the samba bands powering you along the streets?
I think it was.
I'm not quite sure which samba band it was.
I don't know if it was Cardiff Samba or Adrian Samba Band.
I can't remember the name of it.
No, they were basically Brecon.
They used to come down.
Oh, maybe Brecon, yeah.
So yeah, there were a few samba bands,
but yeah, we definitely would have done it.
Got it.
Would your group have performed on the finale
on the steps of the National Museum as well?
We did.
I don't know if it was,
was there a stage there at that time?
Well, the steps themselves actually formed a stage,
but for that year,
we actually even brought a flatbed truck in front of it.
That's right.
To give another, to add an addition.
Yeah, we danced on the flatbed truck.
Fantastic.
I can remember doing that.
Lovely, and I don't believe anything fell off, did they?
Which is- No, no.
Yeah, I remember there was some kind of staging
and yeah, it was the flatbed truck.
It was the flatbed truck.
It was all we could think of.
How can we, it's a functioning museum until five o'clock.
How can we actually introduce another element into it?
And the only thing I could think of
was actually to bring a flatbed truck in.
And so we added, you know,
you had all the other surfaces
that people could work off and show there.
So I thought, hang on, let's try that.
It worked reasonably well.
Definitely.
And we used to get big audiences as well.
We did massive audiences.
And I know, very appreciative.
I mean, the cheers for the costumes.
And then particularly at the end,
when we tried to pick out the name of the theme,
the overarching theme of that year in fireworks
from the top of the museum.
And that was the final moment.
And people used to go completely ape-frozen.
And you know, well, those were the days,
is all I can say.
Absolutely.
You were better.
You probably wouldn't be able to do the flatbed truck
staging now.
And the paratheques are largely out of the question as well.
I mean, those are the days where health and safety
was a bit more lenient.
Whereas now, it probably wouldn't be allowed.
So I remember we had a particular dance sequence,
which is why we performed that on the back of that truck.
Got it.
So I remember distinctly, yeah.
And being professional dancers,
I mean, what you had to offer was of a high order.
It was, yeah.
I mean, the whole point of that car would be that
there are people who have no previous experience.
There are people who are experienced dancers.
Yeah.
There's room for everyone.
I think that's one of the good things about the carnival
is that everybody could take part.
There was no restriction in any way.
And it didn't matter whether you were professional
or you weren't professional
and you just wanted to be part of it.
You could take part in that.
I think the joy of it is voluntary, you know.
And we've always made it quite plain from day one
that nobody should ever do anything
that they don't care to do.
I mean, there are people who've contributed
to the making of costumes over many years, but whom,
some have then come over to the performance,
but who've said, I don't care to you.
And it's like, that's absolutely fine.
You know, there's no right or wrong in carnival.
There's just right.
So everyone is free to do what they want to do, you know,
which is good.
It was good.
So yeah, so, and they were great fun.
I mean, they were just, you know, you met new people.
It was, and it was just fun.
The whole process was fun and exciting and colorful.
And, you know, just, it was great.
It was just, you know, just something to enjoy really.
I look at the smile on your face.
It's all coming back to you, isn't it?
I know, yeah, it was.
I mean, it was high energy.
Yeah, definitely, it was really high energy.
And it was just, it was just great fun.
It was brilliant.
Yeah, really good.
So yeah, so I did that.
And I kind of changed my job there
or changed what I was doing.
And I became the Arts Development Officer
for the Vale of Glamorgan Council,
which I'm still doing quite some years later,
I think 18 years.
18 years later, there we are.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Bit of a time gem.
But I think early on, I think because of my contacts
that I had in Cardiff and stuff,
I was able to sort of draw some of that
into the Vale of Glamorgan.
And I can recall that we did some work
with Barry Carnival,
which had kind of dissipated really.
It had sort of come to the end of its life
being a lot of flatbed lorries.
There were lots of legal issues with that at the time.
Health and safety issues as well.
And times were changing.
The health and safety, the insurance.
There was loads of sort of issues.
So they couldn't do what they'd done before sort of thing.
So we sort of introduced the mass carnival
to Barry really, and did a big workshop
and with a lot of the community there,
all ages, young people, older people,
and ended up parading through Barry Town Centre
along Holton Road and right down to Romney Park,
I think where the parade sort of culminated
with small performances and different shows
and just showing the costumes
that people had made and everything.
So.
I remember you had very good weather as well.
It was lovely.
It was very good.
In our 25 years in Cardiff,
we have suffered the odd damage, as you can imagine.
Definitely.
But yeah, yeah, I think it was pretty good weather
on that day as well.
I've got some quite, some good photographs
of that as well, which I'll have to dig out for you.
I look forward to harvesting those
and putting them online in the archive.
Yeah, yeah.
I can remember the Barry carnival where, as you say,
Swicker had sort of been invited in
and encouraged by yourself to try and put some new impetus
and sort of, you know, intergenerational
and community arts approach into it.
And some of the old guard who were actually
in their 60s and 70s found it very hard
to accept this approach.
And it was quite sad on one level
because I remember they used to meet on a Sunday morning
and it took me a long while to encourage
some local teenagers from Barry to join me
to come to potentially be on this committee.
Unfortunately, some of the elders on this committee
were so horrible to them that after one meeting,
they said that whilst they loved what we were doing
and would continue doing that,
they weren't prepared to sit in a room
and effectively be abused by some old guard
who didn't understand that things change.
Yeah, yeah.
So, I mean, and ultimately, sadly,
the Barry carnival died out, didn't it, Mealy?
It has really.
I think in the last couple of years,
some of the local groups, theater groups,
and some people from the community have started
to rekindle a similar sort of event,
but sort of parading and walking through the town center
and creating a sort of bit of an arts festival,
which is now Barry Arts Festival.
It's been running for about three years, probably,
where they have sort of evenings of music, entertainment,
workshops for young people,
and they do have a little parade
that comes through the town center as well.
But that's only sort of rekindled itself
in the last few years.
But there was a big time period, really,
where there wasn't a carnival, really, as such.
We've had other events and things.
It was motorized, whereas our approach
has always been walking and.
Or pedestrians.
Yeah, pedestrians.
Yeah, it did help us to make it accessible to people
and to avoid pumping out diesel fumes all over everything.
And all the legalities, like we've mentioned.
And I think, so the traditional carnival,
I think, took quite a long time to kind of peter out, really,
and it was difficult for people
to accept something new and different
and something that really hadn't happened
in Barry ever before.
So it was quite a big thing to kind of take on.
And for those older people as well,
they've been used to organizing something very specific
that they knew how to manage,
whereas that was quite new to them.
And people don't accept change very well very often.
They say, oh, it's like me.
You know, so, like my.
You know, yeah, I think it worked really well.
What did happen in the end did work really well.
And, you know, it was a lovely event,
but, you know, times change and things have moved on now.
So, yeah.
Tracy, thank you for all your carnival stories.
I wish to award you verbally the badge of merit
of carnival hero.
And yeah, thank you very much indeed.
Thank you.